# Triangles in Detail#

**Project**: Chap_01/Triangles

**Description**: Draw two blue triangles in screen

## OpenGL Programming Concepts in Background ##

You are not dealing with a task as easy as driving or using a computer in OpenGL programming.
 Rather, you are making a car, or making a computer. It might frighen you, but it's not the fact.
 To help you achive such goals, OpenGL API has sent many professors to stand by your side.
 So, your mission is to understand what you are doing, get to know what tasks thses professors can do,
 and what tasks they can't do, and then issue right commands to them. Then your mission is accomplished. 

Since this is our first OpenGL application, before we touch the code, we get to have some OpenGL Programming
 concepts in background.

### About Client-Server Programming Mode ###

OpenGL is a client-server system, which has 2 meanings:

1. In a network, the client will issue OpenGL commands, while the server will render the image;
2. In the same computer, the client is the application you'are writing, while the server is OpenGL implemetation of the graphics hardware.

So, when we are writing an OpenGL application at most time in a single computer, we are actually making use of the functionality of the specific graphics card installed in our computer to render the images.

### About Rendering ###

A pixel is a smallest visual element in screen. No matter how the rendered image is complicated, it is composited of various of pixels. Each pixel has attributes such as position, color, etc.
 For each pixel, graphics card has corresponding memory to store its information. And when we put or modify the data in these memories, images on the screen will reflect immediately.
 These memories are called **framebuffer**.

However, we are **NOT** to find where these framebuffers are and manage the data in it. That's boring.
 We are doing a more easier job here. We specify vertices' position and color in client in some coordinate systems that we are familiar with, and it's the responsibility of OpenGL to map them in framebuffers.
 This is called **rasterization**.

### About VAOs and VBOs ###

In order to improve performence, some data in our application would nevertheless be copied to buffers. Again, it's easy since we care about only what to copy and **NOT** how to copy. 

In a client-server network, the client computer issues OpenGL commands to the server through the network.
 The client might issue lots of drawing command at the same time. If we send the vetex data each time we send drawing command,
 the netwok's inefficiency is obvious. 

OpenGL take such a approach - OpenGL server created vetex-buffer objects (**VBOs**) to allocate memory chunks to store the vetices data,
 tagged (or indexed) with the vertex array object (**VAO**) names. And each time the OpenGL application needs to render images using these vetices data, it does not actually
 transfer vertices data from the client, it just tell OpenGL server that it would like to use which VAO's buffer data by rebinding a specific
 VAO as the current VAO.

So, when receiving drawing commands from the client, OpenGL server fetches the vetices data previously saved from the buffer tagged with specific VAO name
 instead of from the client, and sends these data to the *framebuffer* immediately.

The same rule applies to non-network client-server mode. In this mode, the OpenGL server is the computer hosting the OpenGL
 program, and still it is the OpenGL server who manages the VAOs and VBOs.

### OpenGL Programs Basic Structure ###

That said, when we are coding in an OpenGL program, we usually do the following things:

1. In a setup-up routine:
    1. Create a VAO and bind it to current VAO.
    2. Supply with vetices data, and store them in VBO
2. In a displaying routine:
    1. rebind a VAO to current VAO.
    2. issue drawing command

We will deal with the first task in *init* function, and the second task in *display* function.

### About Shaders ###

OpenGL shaders are some programs compiled for and executed by the GPU (Graphics Processing Uint).

Graphics hardware has a small but very fast memory. To efficiently improve performence, some fundermental data,
 such as vertex position, vetex color, etc, can be stored in this memory area.

We need to supply these data to shaders in a specific way - a shading way.

## Source Code for triangles.cpp ##

Time to take a peek at the source code.

    #include <iostream>

    #include "vgl.h"
    #include "LoadShaders.h"

    using namespace std;

    const int WINDOW_WIDTH = 500;
    const int WINDOW_HEIGHT = 500;

    GLuint    VAOs[1];
    GLuint Buffers[1];

    const GLuint NumVertices = 6;

    void centerWindow() {
	    glutInitWindowSize(WINDOW_WIDTH, WINDOW_HEIGHT);
	    glutInitWindowPosition((glutGet(GLUT_SCREEN_WIDTH) - WINDOW_WIDTH) / 2, (glutGet(GLUT_SCREEN_HEIGHT) - WINDOW_HEIGHT) / 2);
    }

    void compileShaders() {
	    ShaderInfo shaders[] = {
		    { GL_VERTEX_SHADER, "vs.glsl" },
		    { GL_FRAGMENT_SHADER, "fs.glsl" },
		    { GL_NONE, NULL }
	    };

	    GLuint program = LoadShaders(shaders);
	    glUseProgram(program);
    }

    void init(void) {
	    glGenVertexArrays(1, VAOs);
	    glBindVertexArray(VAOs[0]);

	    GLfloat vertices[NumVertices][2] = {
		    { -0.90, -0.90 },  // Triangle 1
		    {  0.85, -0.90 },
		    { -0.90,  0.85 },
		    {  0.90, -0.85 },  // Triangle 2
		    {  0.90,  0.90 },
		    { -0.85,  0.90 },
	    };

	    glGenBuffers(1, Buffers);
	    glBindBuffer(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, Buffers[0]);
	    glBufferData(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, sizeof(vertices), vertices, GL_STATIC_DRAW);

	    compileShaders();

	    glVertexAttribPointer(0, 2, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE, 0, BUFFER_OFFSET(0));
	    glEnableVertexAttribArray(0);

	    glClearColor(1, 1, 1, 1);
    }

    void display() {
	    glClear(GL_COLOR_BUFFER_BIT);

	    glBindVertexArray(VAOs[0]);
	    glDrawArrays(GL_TRIANGLES, 0, NumVertices);

	    glFlush();
    }

    int main(int argc, char** argv) {
	    glutInit(&argc, argv);

	    glutInitDisplayMode(GLUT_RGBA);

	    centerWindow();

	    //glutInitContextVersion(3, 2);
	    glutInitContextProfile(GLUT_CORE_PROFILE);

	    glutCreateWindow("Triangles");

	    if (glewInit() != GLEW_OK) {
		    cerr << "Unable to initialize GLEW ... exiting" << endl;
		    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
	    }

	    if (GLEW_VERSION_4_4) {
		    cout << "Your graphics hardware supports OpenGL 4.4!" << endl;
	    }
	    else if (GLEW_VERSION_3_3) {
		    cout << "Your graphics hardware supports OpenGL 3.3!" << endl;
	    }

	    init();

	    glutDisplayFunc(display);
	    glutMainLoop();
    }

### What We Do in *init* Routine ###

1. Generate and bind a vertex array.
2. Copy the data in vertex array to a buffer.
3. Complie shaders.
4. Tell the OpenGL how to use the data from data store of the buffer to feed the shader.

#### Creating and Binding A Vertex Array Object (VAO) ####

    void glGenVertexArrays(	GLsizei n, GLuint *arrays);

Applied for new vertex array object names. OpenGL manages these names. Names are nothing but of type *GLuint* to identify the VAO that will be generated by the succeeding invocation of *glBindVertexArray*.

    void glBindVertexArray(GLuint array)

When parameter array is first bound, a new VAO will be created. And only at this binding point, the VAO's state and type are acquired.
 
#### Creating and Populating Vetex-Buffer Object (VBO) ####

All data should be stored in buffer objects before drawing. Drawing means transfering the vertex data to OpenGL server.
 
    void glGenBuffers(GLsizei n, GLuint *buffers)
    void glBindBuffer(GLenum target, GLuint buffer)

We need to set up data in a VBO associated with current VAO. With parameter *target* specified with *GL_ARRAY_BUFFER*, *glBindBuffer* create a new VBO and set it as current VBO.

    void glBufferData(GLenum target, GLsizeiptr size, const GLvoid *data, GLenum usage);

*glBufferData* populates current VBO with parameter *data*.

#### Compiling and Linking with Shaders ####

We grouped all functions relating to shaders into a function *compileShaders*. In it, we call *loadShaders* to load two shader files (vs.glsl and fs.glsl), compile them, attach them
 to a shaper *program*, link the program, and use the program. Until then, these shaders has connection with the OpenGL application.

Although the whole process of compiling and linking is critical for shading programming, at this time, we'd rather take it as a black box to make learning easier.

#### Feeding data to Shaders ####

Vertex shaders and fragment shaders are both required for shading in OpenGL version 3.1 or greater.

In Triangle project, *vs.glsl* is the vertex shader and *fs.glsl* is the fragment shader.

Look at *vs.glsl* first.

    #version 430 core

    layout (location = 0) in vec4 vPosition;

    void main() {
	    gl_Position = vPosition;
    }

*gl_Position* is a special shader variable provided by OpenGL used to transfer vertex data to GPU. Each time
 OpenGL needs vertex data, it will execute vertex shader and fetch it from *gl_Position*. All we need is only
 assigning this variable with what we want.

In previous code, we assigned the value of *vPosition* to *gl_Position*.

*vPosition* is a global variable we declared in shader to receive the data from buffer data of type *vec4*.
 We might have serval such variables, and all of them has a location starting from 0.

##### About *glVertexAttribPointer* #####

Up till now, the issue remains how to feed vertex data from buffer to *vPosition* in shader. We do it via
 *glVertexAttribPointer*.

    void glVertexAttribPointer(	GLuint index,
 	    GLint size,
 	    GLenum type,
 	    GLboolean normalized,
 	    GLsizei stride,
 	    const GLvoid * pointer)

We just set up a VBO and populates it with some data. Parameter *index* decides to which vertex shading variable
 we want to feed with the data in current VBO, identified with shader variable's location just mentioned. And the rest
 parameters of *glVertexAttribPointer* are to tell OpenGL how to set the pointer correctly each time it needs
 vertex data from VBO.

As a programmer, we do not actually transfer the data from buffer to shader. Rather, we define a pointer pointing to the
 buffer data, and each time, when the OpenGL needs a vertex data, it will fetch data based on this pointer and then move the pointer
 foreaward in background. This is why the function name consists of "Pointer". 

Yet it is not obvious now what "vertex attrib" means, in a VBO that only consists of all data of vertex location as above.

In some vertex arrays, if we need, we can store both vertex position and vetex color information in it as following:

	GLfloat vertex_info[] = {
		-1.0f, -1.0f,         // first vertex position
		 1.0f,  0.0f,  0.0f,  // first vertex color

		 1.0f, -1.0f,         // second vertex position
		 0.0f,  1.0f,  0.0f,  // second vertex color

		 0.0f,  1.0f,         // third vertex position
		 0.0f,  0.0f,  1.0f   // third vertex color
	};

*vertex_info* has 3 pairs of vertex information, each pair consists of vertex position and vertex color. We say we have 2 kinds of vertex attributes
 in it.

The vertex position and color are stored alternately in buffer memory. In such circumstance, we can define 2 vertex attribute pointers pointing to position
 and color respectively. Here is how:

	glVertexAttribPointer(0, 2, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE, sizeof(GL_FLOAT) * 5, BUFFER_OFFSET(0));                     // position
	glVertexAttribPointer(1, 3, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE, sizeof(GL_FLOAT) * 5, BUFFER_OFFSET(sizeof(GL_FLOAT) * 2));  // color

The code sizeof(GL\_FLOAT) \* 5 means every other 5 GL\_FLOAT, there would be a position and color vertex attribute. And the color attributes begins after 2 GL_FLOAT.

And the code for *fs.glsl*:

    #version 430 core

    out vec4 fColor;

    void main() {
	    fColor = vec4(0.0, 0.0, 1.0, 1.0);
    }

We assign a blue color to every vertex by using the *out* variable *fColor*.

After setting up the pointer, we need to enable the pointer by using *glEnableVertexAttribArray*.

### What We Do in *display* Routine ###

Compared with *init* routine, codes in *display* routine are very simple.

We can take each VAO as an index of buffer memory that has been allocated previously. When
 we need to use one of such buffer memory, we rebind a certain VAO to current VAO using *glBlindVertexArray* again,
 then the whole memory block under that VAO is available for OpenGL to be used to render images.

    void glDrawArrays(	GLenum mode,
 	    GLint first,
 	    GLsizei count)

*glDrawArrays* renders primitives using the array data from current VBO under current VAO. It uses *count* sequential __elements__,
 starting from *first* element, from each enabled array, to construct a sequence of primitives of type *mode*.

What does an **element** mean? Thinking of the vertex array below:

	GLfloat vertices[6][2] = {
		{ -0.90, -0.90 },  // Triangle 1
		{  0.85, -0.90 },
		{ -0.90,  0.85 },
		{  0.90, -0.85 },  // Triangle 2
		{  0.90,  0.90 },
		{ -0.85,  0.90 },
	};

There are altogether 6 vertices, each vertex consists of a pair of {x, y} corordinate. Then each element in it is listed below:

1. {-0.90, -0.90}
2. { 0.85, -0.90}
3. {-0.90,  0.85}
4. { 0.90, -0.85}
5. { 0.90,  0.90}
6. {-0.85,  0.90}

In this case, a vertex comprised of two components is a element. Then, we can easily figure out the role of each *glDrawArrays* below:

    glDrawArrays(GL_TRIANGLES, 0, 3)  // taking 3 elements, starting from the first element, to construct 1 triangle
    glDrawArrays(GL_TRIANGLES, 3, 3)  // taking 3 elements, starting from the third element, to construct 1 triangle
    glDrawArrays(GL_TRIANGLES, 0, 6)  // taking 6 elements, starting from the first element, to construct 2 triangles

And as for:

	GLfloat vertex_info[] = {
		-1.0f, -1.0f,         // first vertex position
		 1.0f,  0.0f,  0.0f,  // first vertex color

		 1.0f, -1.0f,         // second vertex position
		 0.0f,  1.0f,  0.0f,  // second vertex color

		 0.0f,  1.0f,         // third vertex position
		 0.0f,  0.0f,  1.0f   // third vertex color
	};

There would be 2 enabled vertex attribute arrays. When constructing each element, OpenGL would fetch data from the position attribue array
 and color attribue array simutaneiously as below:

         pos_attrib         color_attrib
    1. {-1.0f, -1.0f}    {1.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f}
    2. { 1.0f, -1.0f}    {0.0f, 1.0f, 0.0f}
    3. { 0.0f,  1.0f}    {0.0f, 0.0f, 1.0f}

That is, each element consists of both of position attribute and color attribute.

So, when we invoke

    glDrawArrays(GL_TRIANGLES, 0, 3);

OpenGL will fetch 3 elments, starting from the first element, to construct a colored triangle.


## Key Functions in Triangles Project ##

* *glBindVertexArray*
* *glBindBuffer* and *glBufferData*
* *glVertexAttribPointer*
* *glDrawArrays*

## Exercises ##

1.  Using the vertex_info data structure above, draw a colored triangle.

    **Hints**: Almost all necessary steps are mentioned above, except shaders. And here is the shaders for it:

    **vs.glsl**:

        #version 430 core

        layout (location = 0) in vec4 vPosition;
        layout (location = 1) in vec4 vColor;

        out vec4 fs_color;

        void main() {
	        gl_Position = vPosition;
	        fs_color = vColor;
        }

    **fs.glsl**:

        #version 430 core

        in vec4 fs_color;

        layout (location = 0) out vec4 color;

        void main() {
	        color = fs_color;
        }

    The key point here is that we convey vertex position and vertex color from application to vertex shader, and by using
     the *in* and *out* variables in *vs.glsl* and *fs.glsl*, the OpenGL conveys vertex color from *vs.glsl* to *fs.glsl*.

2.  We combined both vertex position and veretex color in a array in veretex_info, and copy them to a VBO in a bundle.
     What approaches else can we take?

    Can we use 2 arrays to define vertex position and vertex color separately, and copy both of them to
     a sole VBO?

    Or even, after defining in 2 arrays, copy them separately to 2 VBOs? If so, how to use these 2 VBOs?


## References ##
1. OpenGL 4.5 Reference Pages: <https://www.opengl.org/sdk/docs/man/>